Here you go.
Couldn't sleep all night.
- Fell asleep at dawn.
- Hmm.
Even if the essential
people of Bengal sleep...
my truth-seeking friend can't.
I'm very proud of him.
I feel great pride
in my friend and ally.
The job puts a lot of stress
on the brain.
Without enough rest...
the body will give way.
I'll get it.
Hello?
Yes, speaking...
Yes, yes.
Tell me.
What?
When?
Yes, we're coming.
Goodbye.
Satyabati, call Byomkesh.
- Immediately?
- Yes, immediately. Call him.
- Stop!
- Wait!
Stop, I say!
He suffered the second attack
last night.
Dr. Sen was there but...
What did the doctor write
in the death certificate?
Natural death.
Why? Do you suspect foulplay?
No, there's nothing suspicious but...
At such a time, a little carelessness
or wilful negligence can be fatal.
If Rameshwar dies, it isn't a loss
for any of them.
Rather, they all gain from it.
If Rameshwar has left a will...
And if he has included Nalini in it...
Don't you think they'd destroy it
if they knew?
We have to chase the will, Ajit.
That one.
Byomkesh?
Let's go.
Stop!
Or I'll shoot!
Stop, I say!
Wait! Stop!
I'm telling you to stop!
- Her?
- Come.
Nalini?
Greetings! I am Byomkesh Bakshi.
I got your address from Dr. Asim Sen.
What a coincidence, Byomkesh!
I was just about to visit you!
Can we talk inside?
Stop!
Day before yesterday
I received this letter from dad.
Last night... it all ended.
Who gave you the news?
Dr. Sen?
Hmm.
"My dear, sending you and son-in-law
blessings for the New Year.
When you get news of my death,
meet Mr. Byomkesh Bakshi.
Your well-wisher,
Father."
When did you last meet Rameshwar?
Last year, at the end
of the Durga festival.
That's alright.
Hey!
You didn't go there today?
No.
Did your sister-in-law dislike you
from the very beginning?
Yes.
Nalini, Dr. Sen told me that...
Rameshwar has made a will.
Do you know where that will is?
How would I know?
My sister-in-law always kept Father
confined to his room.
And he had become very frail.
He couldn't come out
from his second-floor room.
Hmm?
Okay.
So, if Father had made a will, then...
He has surely left me something.
Certainly... Otherwise there would be
no need for a will.
But is it still there?
My sister-in-law
must have destroyed it.
Your father was a very wise man, Nalini.
I firmly believe that if he...
has made a will, it's so tactfully
hidden that no one can find it easily.
We need to get to it
before Kusheshwar or Lavanya do.
No, there's a problem, Byomkesh.
Two witnesses are required
to make a will.
In that case, if Rameshwar has made a will,
who are the two witnesses?
No, there are exceptions
and laws.
If you write the entire will
in your own hand...
Then you don't need any witnesses.
Oh.
I firmly believe that...
The will is in the house itself.
We have to search for it.
Who will grant us permission?
We will have to take help
from the police.
- Ma'am!
- Hmm?
The police have arrested Debnath.
What happened again?
Abhay Ghoshal was murdered yesterday.
What?
Really?
Yes.
That traitor Laltu
informed the police that...
Last night, they were supposed
to go together, so...
- Abhay has been murdered?
- Yes.
Nalini, what is the relation
between Abhay Ghoshal and Debnath?
They were friends...
- They were in the Swadeshi Movement together.
- What!
Abhay Ghoshal was part
of the Swadeshi Movement?
Yes.
Abhay Ghoshal,
Swadeshi Movement!
Ajit?
- Ajit!
- Hmm?
Let's go.
Goodbye.
- Hmm.
- Okay, sir.
Abhay Ghoshal was a rich man's son
but he was wanderer.
The two murder cases he was involved in...
both victims were associated
with the black market.
So, it couldn't be proven that Abhay
Ghoshal murdered or was involved.
Abhay Ghoshal was part
of the Swadeshi Movement...
How can I say for sure?
There's no proof.
Wow, there's no proof?
Mhm.
And what we heard
about his father...
That also seems suspicious.
His father, Adhar Ghoshal...
had informed the police about a
secret hideout of a revolutionary group.
The Swadeshis were not prepared
for such a sudden police raid.
That day, some Swadeshi workers died
in the shootout...
Hands up!
Among them was
named Dinanath Das.
Dinanath Das is Debnath Das' father.
So, what does the guy's father do?
He was part of the Swadeshi Movement.
He was shot dead by the police.
Adhar Ghoshal was found dead
in his home.
They found poison
in his stomach.
It was clear
that Abhay Ghoshal was the murderer.
The lizrd asks the mosquito
if it wants to drink blood!
At least, you admit you're a mosquito!
Yes.
But I know who
to suck blood out of.
(chanting prayer for the deceased)
But he had such a strong alibi that...
But nothing could be proven.
- He's like Robin Hood!
- Yes, they had a gang.
And Debnath used to be part of that gang.
And Abhay Ghoshal indirectly helped them
with money and ideas.
I can't quite understand how
to solve the case.
I see a vague puzzle
but just can't piece it together.
A puzzle? What's the puzzle?
Let's see if I can solve it.
You?
Yes, I can try.
- Try? Oh.
- Yes.
So...
Bishu Pal is hiding
from Abhay Ghoshal.
Yes.
Abhay Ghoshal works
with Debnath Das.
Debnath is Rameshwar Ray's son-in-law.
Hmm.
Rameshwar Ray is like a brother
to Bishu Pal.
Rameshwar's son Kusheshwar is
like Bishu Pal's student.
Rameshwar Ray has arranged
for his son's fees to Bishu Pal...
- which has to be found...
- Oh...
by Byomkesh Bakshi.
- So, Bidhu, you want to try?
- No! Let it be.
You said Bongo Pal is lame, right?
- It's Bishu Pal.
No, no, no.
That needs to be examined first.
Yes, then at least we get a starting point
for the case.
Wait, wait, wait, Bidhu. First you
have to arrange for something else.
What?
I feel, Ajit that the solution to this case
is in Rameshwar's will.
Go to Rameshwar's house with Bidhu.
- And you?
- I have some other work.
- Bidhu?
- Yes?
You'll have to arrange
for that too.
Okay.
- Please come.
- Yes, let's go.
- Greetings, Dr. Rakshit. He's Dr. Asim sen.
- Greetings.
- He'll examine Bishu once.
- Ramapati?
- Examine?
- What are you saying?
- I'm the local police in charge...
Ramapati Dutta.
- Here's the order.
- Order... examination... what are you saying?
Last night Abhay Ghoshal
was murdered.
I want to talk to Bishu about that.
Murdered?
Abhay Ghoshal?
Murdered.
Abhay Ghoshal.
- Let's go?
- Huh?
- Come on.
- Yes.
- What's the matter?
- Go. Go!
- But what...
- Go!
Wh-What's going on?
Come in.
Search the rooms inside.
Go on.
- Okay, sir.
- Search for what?
Two of you stand there.
By that door.
- Bidhu?
- Yes?
- Hmm.
- Hmm?
Hmm.
Abhay Ghoshal has been murdered?
- Are you sure?
- Yes.
Open the windows.
You'll feel more ill this way.
Now I'll open them.
I... I have no fear now.
Only, I lost an interest
of Rs. 33,400.55.
- At least your life is saved.
- That's true.
And I'll also save on the
of Rs. 10 each, that's Rs. 20,
on the guards salary.
- Hey.
- Yes?
Open the window.
Please go ahead
with your examination.
Hmm.
- Sir.
- Hmm?
Searched the whole house.
Found no deed, only a few racing books.
They were harrassed for nothing.
No, Bidhu.
Someone has searched the room before us.
Where did Byomkesh go?
Kusheshwar, have you found the will?
Weren't you a writer?
When did you become a detective?
Perhaps you're forgetting,
detectives are born from a writer's pen.
- Father made no will.
- No, we don't have a doubt about that.
Because Rameshwar wrote the same letter
to Byomkesh and Nalini, so...
Where did you suddenly
disappear, Byomkesh?
Dr. Sen says
that the paralysis is genuine.
Yes, that's obvious.
Why would an old man
pretend to be lame for no reason?
Let's go.
Take a look.
Onions?
- Lavanya?
- Yes?
Did your father-in-law like
to eat raw onions?
Can't say he liked it.
But before he died,
he was tempted to have raw onions.
Before he died, isn't it?
Yes.
He had weak teeth,
so he ground the onions.
So, this was how many days
before he died?
- Around 10-12 days before.
- Ten-twelve days...
- Ajit?
- Hmm?
Why don't you write a story?
'Life's Last Onion Fritter'!
Onions...
Souvenir...
Student...
Empty dispensary...
Racing booklets...
Debnath...
Bishu Pal...
Tonight at 11 o'clock
at the Kumortuli river bank...
Judge for yourself
whether I'm telling the truth.
Hello, Rakshit?
Yes, Byomkesh Bakshi here.
We want to speak
to Bishu Pal again.
Today itself.
We'll be there shortly, okay?
Great, great.
I'm hanging up.
What exactly do you want to do?
- Occupy the kingdom of Chedi.
- Chedi?
- Bidhu?
- Yes?
- A cigarette, please?
- Yes.
Here.
Greetings, Byomkesh.
- Greetings, Ajit.
- Greetings.
What were you doing, Dr. Rakshit?
General check-up.
I do it in the evenings.
- How was the check-up?
- It'll take some time.
The illness is severe, you see.
- It'll take some time now.
- Oh really?
I feel Bishu is quite healthy.
Isn't it, Bishu?
No, no.
What are you saying, Byomkesh!
He's unwell.
He's not healthy?
- Alright, let me check once.
- Huh?
Hey! B...
B...
There.
What do you think, Bishu?
What are you saying?
Bishu, you have to accompany us
for some very important work.
- Come on, we'll need you.
- No, Byomkesh, he will not leave.
Wait, wait, wait, Byomkesh.
Listen to me.
Byomkesh, listen to me.
Byomkesh!
Come on.
Byomkesh, it's in poor taste to joke
with a disbaled person like this.
What do I do, Suresh?
There's a paucity of good taste too.
Step aside.
- I'm telling you, you...
- Move.
Why are you all just standing
and watching?
- Inspector, they're misbehaving with a sick man...
- Stop it.
- Come on.
- Byomkesh, this isn't right.
Hey!
See, Bishu?
Didn't I say there's nothing wrong
with your legs?
They're absolutely fine.
And why won't they be fine?
This afternoon I mixed a fake Procaine
in the injection.
Open the windows.
When Dr. Sen began to examine you...
I took the opportunity
to get my own work done.
Luck aided me, Bishu.
The guard outside your room was sleeping.
That's it!
How will the fake Procaine,
numb his legs, Rakshit?
Byomkesh, I've heard of Cocaine
but what's Procaine?
This afternoon I came to know
about it from Dr. Asim Sen.
Earlier, chloroform was used on a patient
to make him unconscious for an operation.
We don't need it anymore.
There are medicines like Procaine.
If this is injected
in certain areas in the spinal cord...
Some parts of the body
become numb.
Then that part can be easily operated on.
This is Procaine.
It was then that I became suspicious.
That with this Procaine injection,
Dr. Rakshit proves Bishu as paralysed...
But the effect of medicines like Procaine
doesn't stay for more than 5-6 hours.
No outsider came to know
about this.
Only Suresh Rakshit knew...
You knew too, right?
The workers all know
that the owner is paralysed.
Ther's no reason to doubt it.
And Bishu, you were expecting the police
about Abhay Ghoshal's murder...
to come to your house.
That's why, Dr. Rakshit, taking no risks,
gave you an injection this morning.
That's why Dr. Sen's examination
showed you were paralysed.
Then, when I called to say that I'm coming
again today, then in the evening...
he gave you another injection.
But that had fake Procaine.
So it did not work.
I don't know...
I'm checking it.
Am I saying anything wrong, Dr. Rakshit?
I'll file a defamation suit against you.
You won't be able
to file a suit.
You need money for that.
There's no one but flies
in your dispensary.
Probably can't even pay the rent
and he'll file a suit!
Isn't it, Bishu Pal?
Suresh Rakshit is also
one of your debtors, right?
You've decorated his dispensary
so that he doesn't seem like a fake doctor.
Why?
Why would I do that?
Huh?
Strange!
Because you'll need the doctor.
- Hey, catch him!
- Hey! Arrest him!
Take him away.
We must build a strong case against him.
Take him to the police station.
Go. Go!
Go. Take him away.
Come on!
So, Byomkesh?
What are you going to arrest me for?
For lying in bed, paralysed?
Can it hold water in court?
Your crime is more severe.
You see...
Abhay and Debnath together...
would loot rice from merchants and
distribute it among the famine-stricken.
Then, after tricking Debnath...
Abhay started black marketing
with that rice.
Abhay used to work
for the common people till now.
That's why he was my friend.
But the black market
during this famine...
turned him too.
Traitor.
Last night...
Abhay reached the river bank
to loot the rice.
He had already made a deal
with the boatmen.
Debnath also got the news
and secretly went there.
But that man had already reached
before him...
The man whose rice
was being smuggled.
Who was that?
Bishu Pal himself.
I found out from police records...
that two of your debtors
have been killed before.
They, probably, couldn't
return your money either.
Nothing could be proven
in those cases.
So you went ahead with the same plan.
But this time you had a brilliant ruse
for your alibi.
Greetings.
You're a cunning man, Bishu.
You sent Suresh Rakshit to my house
to call for me.
I'm here on behalf of a patient.
Hmm.
You needed a witness
whom no one would disbelieve.
- And if you could tell me when you can go...
- I'll go today itself.
Oh, wow!
That's great.
If you could tell me
around what time...
I told Suresh that I'll go
at six o'clock.
So, Suresh gave you the Procaine injection
at maybe around one or two o'clock.
You had decided
that you would murder Abhay last night.
Accordingly, you had the story
of the loot all set.
When you got to know that we had visited
Abhay's house...
You sent Suresh Rakshit
after us right away?
Huh?
How strange!
You're losing your temper, Byomkesh.
It's because of such people that Bengal
is facing such a famine today, Ajit.
History will not forgive them.
Coachman, let's go, hurry up!
Come on, drive fast.
Around 8 p.m.
your legs were back to normal.
Sir, I'm leaving for the night.
One of your guards leaves at that time
and another comes at 11 p.m.
I think you left home
at around 8:30 p.m.
According to the plan, Abhay Ghoshal
was busy looting your rice.
Debnath already knew about that plan.
Debnath is a true patriot.
He doesn't want to spare
the country's enemy.
Meanwhile, you reached the river bank too.
After committing the murder,
you came back home by 11 p.m.
No one came to know.
And it's so difficult
to doubt your alibi...
A man's who's been paralysed
for three months...
How can he murder someone?
Impossible!
Who'll be your witness
at the court, Byomkesh?
That convicted hooligan, Debnath?
The fact that Abhay Ghoshal
wanted to kill me...
There are many witnesses
to testify to it.
And what do you think?
Even if I have murdered someone...
I did it in self-defence.
The law excuses that, hmm?
One has the right to murder
for self-defence, but...
the law doesn't pardon a cold blooded
murder planned for three months.
You had made a mistake.
A greedy moneylender...
who's part of the black market
stealing the food of the poor...
thus, creating this famine...
A man like that called for me,
and told me his sad story...
And spent Rs. 100
to find out the meaning of a letter.
Will you be able to prove
that I smuggle rice for the black market?
You don't do it yourself.
You have people for that.
Who's that fellow now?
- Bidhu?
- Yes?
- You go the rice godown with Bishu.
- Okay.
Ajit and I are bringing that fellow
to the storehouse.
- Alright.
- Let's go, Shishu Pal.
Can't let you go on
till you commit your hundredth crime.
You'll be struck down before that.
Come on, get up.
I will not go anywhere.
Get up!
Hurry up! Fast!
Stop it.
Stop it!
(indistinct chatter)
What happened?
Go on.
Why have you arrested my husband?
- What has he done?
- I'll tell you.
But what I'll tell you...
is mostly heard from Debnath
and the rest is my guess.
Correct me if I'm wrong, Lavanya. Okay?
Your husband, Kusheshwar, had lost
a lot of money at the racing ground.
Then Rameshwar made sure
that he didn't have money to lose.
And he didn't get much support
from you either, Lavanya.
Then, Kusheshwar...
came to Bishu Pal for help.
He took money from Bishu Pal
to go to the races again.
But unfortunately, and naturally,
he couldn't return Bishu Pal's money.
Then Bishu Pal put him
in a tight spot.
Will I be able to do this?
I don't know. This is the work.
That's it!
This isn't a sin, right?
Sin, my foot.
- You're mocking me...
- Everyone's making money during this war and famine.
But it's wrong when we do it?
Do exactly as Bishu Uncle says.
- Softly.
- Shut up. Softly!
- Why softly?
- My...
Hmph!
Kumod, my own son has a role
to play in this famine?
And here my years are waning.
But before I die...
I have to atone...
- Isn't it?
- Hmm?
No, Kumod...
I won't leave my property
in that idiot's hands.
I must make arrangements
for you and Nalini.
Rameshwar decided to make a will.
But how could he ensure that the
will remain intact after his death?
Then, Nalini, your father came up
with a very clever solution.
Last night, I had a terrible nightmare.
I was in heaven after death.
And they send you straight to hell
if you even mention onions there.
- What will happen?
- But your food is cooked with onions.
But I won't be able to eat onions
after death.
I want to eat all the onions
in this life itself.
From now on,
give me 10 whole onions every day.
Okay... okay.
I wouldn't have gotten to the root
of Rameshwar's billiant idea...
had Ajit not brought up
the matter with me.
You see, Kusheshwar?
You can't forget that many detectives
are born of a writer's pen.
But where is the will?
Will you be able to show it?
Satyabati?
Hey, Satyabati!
- Satyabati!
- Goodness, what's the matter?
Satyabati, where have you kept
Rameshwar's letter?
- I don't know, look for it yourself.
- What do you...
You really don't know?
Ajit, where did I keep it?
- I don't know.
- How strange!
How's this possible!
A letter can't just vanish from the house.
Tell me why you're looking for it.
Rameshwar had asked me to keep the letter
as his last memory.
- I didn't understand the meaning then, Ajit.
- You...
You never told us the meaning
of that poem.
Forget the poem.
That letter is Rameshwar's will.
If I don't get that letter
I'll be ruined.
Please, tell me where it is.
- Try and find it in your mind.
- Why are you doing this with me?
You know that these days
I can't recall anything properly.
Try to remember.
What were you doing
when the letter arrived?
What was I doing...
What was I doing? What was I doing?
- Ajit, what I was doing?
- Don't tell him anything.
- Remember it yourself.
- Why are you doing this?
You know I can't remember things well.
Please tell me.
You must remember.
I won't let you go crazy.
Had Bhishma gone crazy?
Byomkesh, what was the Rs. 5000 about?
Tell me.
With age...
Is he really going crazy?
Bhishma...
Bhishma's episode.
Bhishma's episode!
Please get 'the Mahabharata'.
You knew it.
You're just sitting there and laughing!
Give me, give it here, give it to me.
Oh!
'Thank you' is very meaningless,
isn't it, Satyabati?
Ajit?
Here's the will.
If it's written with onion juice,
it can't be read with the naked eye.
But there's a simple way
to make those letters visible.
Do you want to see?
Ajit, hold this.
Please step aside, Bishu.
- Ajit, help me out.
- Yes, coming.
- Give me the letter.
- Oh.
"Hail Lord Basudeva!
I, Rameshwar Ray, residing at 17, Shyamdhar
Mitra Lane, Bagbazar, Kolkata...
am writing my final will
in healthy body and sound mind.
It was not possible to get witnesses
under the circumstances.
Hence, I am writing this will
in my own hand from start to end.
I am not delusional or senile.
Dr. Asim Sen is proof of that.
My three houses in Kolkata
and all the money in my account...
Of them, my house on Harrisson Road
and one lakh rupees...
shall be bequeathed
to my daughter, Nalini.
My wife, Kumodini, shall enjoy the benefits
of my house in Shyampukur all her life.
After her death, my house in Shyampukur
shall also be given to Nalini.
As regards my son Kusheshwar's
laudable wisdom...
I donate two lakh rupees
to the relief fund for the famine-stricken.
Bishu, this is your payment.
And my present residence
which is on Shyamdhar Mitra Lane...
That house and the remaining money in my
account shall be given to Kusheshwar...
on this condition that he will
look after Kumodini all his life.
If there's any negligence
in looking after Kumodini...
my son Kusheshwar will have
to leave the house on Shyamdhar Mitra Lane.
The famous truth-seeker Byomkesh Bakshi
and the renowned doctor Asim Sen...
I declare as executors of my will.
They will make arrangements
as they see fit...
and will receive Rs. 5000
from my estate as fees.
First day of Baisakh, 1350
according to the Bengali calendar.
Signed,
Rameshwar Ray."
Come on.
There's no need...
No need for this, Debnath...
It's so simple, huh?
I'll take this will to court.
Hey, speak up.
- Let's go.
- Can you contest it?
Oh please! Stop it!
You couldn't stop your old father-in-law
from making a will...
What makes you think
you can stop the truth-seeker?
Dr. Asim Sen and Bidhu Bhattacharya here
will testify to this will.
Do you have any witnesses?
Hey, take them away.
- Come with us.
- What's wrong? Move.
You've hit me where it hurts,
Byomkesh Bakshi.
I will snatch away your rice.
If that stops you from depriving lakhs
of people of food...
then so be it, Bishu Pal.
- Go, take him with you.
- Take him away.
- Let's go.
- Come on, I say!
- Get him into the car.
- Yes, sir.
It's all done.
But how did you know from the letter
that Rameshwar has made a will?
Very simple.
Wait, I'll teach you how.
But you won't tell Ajit anything.
Let him rack his brains.
- Okay.
- What was the poem?
"Sing praises of Paramahansa,
by dividing into two his name...
Beauty claims the second part
and God, the first does claim."
Which novel did Rameshwar talk about
in his letter?
- 'Krishnakanta's Will'.
Paramhansa, that is, Ramkrishna.
What happens if we split the name in two?
- Ram and Krishna.
Now, "Beauty claims the second part
and God, the first does claim."
What's the second half?
- Krishna.
And if you link Krishna and beauty?
- 'Kanta' means beauty... Krishnakanta!
- Krishnakanta.
Now, "God, the first does claim."
- First half means... Ram.
- And when you link Ram with God?
- Ishwar which means God.
- So the two add up to Rameshwar.
- So, 'Krishnakanta's Will' becomes...
- Rameshwar's will.
- So, does the tale end here?
- No, it doesn't end here.
Then your husband
caused a small stir.
What did you do again?
Well, Satyabati...
This is probably nothing in the face of
the horrifying famine consuming Bengal...
But something's better
than nothing.
- So, Bidhu?
- Hmm?
- You'll testify, won't you?
Yes, certainly.
Sir...
The Civil Supply Department.
Hang your Civil Supply Department!
If anyone hinders this auspicious event,
I'll dismiss him. Dismiss!
(all cheering)
How many lives will it take
to end this all-consuming famine?
Even amid all the disappointments...
I feel like quoting my friend
Jibananda Das again and again...
"Still the owl lies awake
The dying frog still begs for life
Just for the warmth of another sunrise."